h1. Notes




h1. Talk

Good evening,

I'd like to thank everyone for attending, I realize the message the message got out last for this meeting and this isn't the third thursday so I wanted to say thank you for showing up tonight.

My name is David DeSandro and Jackson Wilkinson has handed off administering Refresh DC to me. To kick off the new year and as an introduction for me to you, I'll be presenting tonight.

Before I get into that, I would like to thank our hosts CDIA for providing this awesome space. _To hear more about CDIA, Bill can speak about this facility and the great things that go on here._

@Intro CDIA Person to speak@

To piggyback on to that, I should disclaim that I just graduated from the Graphic and Web Design course earlier this week. And if anyone is interested in hearing more about CDIA from a student, feel free to approach me about it later.

@Intro Sponsor?@


My name is David DeSandro and I work as a web designer for nclud in Washington DC. Today, I'm going to talk about color.  Not just because color is one of the pillars on which graphic design is built, but because unlike most designers I just so happen to be color blind.

I've always been impressed that when I reveal this bit of personal information, how many people find it fascinating.  Colorblindness isn't that rare of a condition. As a genetic condition linked to the y chromosome, it is most usually found in males - about 7% of the American males are red-green colorblind. But it isn't exclusive to males, as about 1 out of every 200 women has some form of colorblindness. In fact, I would guess that for every person you know that is left handed, you can probably name name another one that is colorblind. Even still, people are typically fascinated that I have what is pretty much a generic condition.


h2. Legitimacy of colorblind in the design profession

Before I get into the intricacies of the color blind experience, I'm sure everyone here is now trying to discredit my ability as a designer, so let me just meet that head on.

As a web designer, I can say that half of my job is development and the other half is visual design.  Of that visual design, we can break that up into the three foundational areas: layout, typography, and color.  So right there, I'm only incompetent in 16% of my job. But more on this to come.

h2. What is color blindness

I think what makes colorblindness so fascinating and misunderstood can be attributed to issues.

h3. Blindness

The first is simply a misnomer.  Colorblindness connotes that color cannot be seen.  This is not the case.  The best way I can explain it is that colors get mixed up.

Now this phenomena is not unique to just colorblind people, its just more prevalent in their every day life.  Consider night, when there isn't a lot of light.  You might spot a car way down the street and you do not attribute a color to it simply because you can't make it out. Your sensory experience tells you its a car, because it has the shape of the car, and your behavioral experience heavily influences this as you expect that large squarish- roundish shapes located close to paved roads are typically cars.

h3. Colors are unique aesthetic experiences

The first is that colors, more so than the other properties of sight, we lack a proper vocabulary for describing colors. Whereas with shapes we can describe their characteritics fairly easily - four sided, parallel lines.  five points. Colors are just sort of obvious. And once we get a name for a color, its hard to describe it any other way.  How do you classify blue?  Can you describe the color salmon without using some of the other colors that are around it?

So let's try to remedy that by diving into the attributes of color.

h2. Color abstractions

Back in grade school we learned that there were three primary colors - red, yellow, and blue.  And then mixing those we can get orange, green, and purple.  

And then when I got into web design I learned about Additive colors, That Red light, green light and blue light can be combined to make white.  

And then when I learned about print design, I learned that they used Cyan, Magenta, Yellow inks, and you can layer them to get the missing colors.  Plus Black to get the darker areas.

But the real flaw with these models is that they rely on base colors in order to explain secondary colors. For the purposes of explaining color blindness I think there's a better model.

h2. HSL

How would we classify colors? Between all the base colors we just mentioned, what I think of as the rainbow colors: ROYGBIV. These are all hues.

But we can also imagine faded or washed out versions of these colors.  Rust, and the color of 1990's denim.  Basically, we can place all the rainbow colors on one side of a scale, and on the complete other end would be gray.  The words we use to describe colors on this scale is "faded, washed out, saturated, vibrant"  This is Saturation.

And what about the other obvious non-colors? Black and White?  Well just as we placed gray against the the other dimension of saturated colors, we can put the that whole plane in between other planes.  On the bottom is pure black, in the middle is the grays and the ROYGBIV colors, and the other far end is pure white.  This is the lightness dimension.

And all together we have the Hue Saturation and Lightness model of color:

Hues - rainbow
Saturation - pie chart
Lightness - light bulb

h2. So

Bringing it back to my legitamacy as a designer.  Colors were the section that was my issue. Now being color blind isn't the problem.  My actual problem is not that I cannot tell pale yellow from dark yellow. Or from faded rust red, from a vibrant red. The issue with color blindness is that I mix up reds and greens.  Or blues and purples.  My problem is with hues.

Therefore we can subdivied the color component on this chart by three again, and now I'm only about 5% incompetent.  Cool.

h2. What's so great about HSL colors

Well that's all fine and good that I have nicely vindicated myself in regard to my ability as a designer, but what's the practical take away?

h2. Color theory with HSLa

Typically when you encounter articles discussing color theory, and how you should build your color palette, they only go so far as to discuss how to select various hues. The most basic of which is that for every color, there its complement lies on the opposite side of the color wheel.  Red / green, blue / orange, purple / yellow.  And then you run into more sophisticated ones.  In addition to the complementary colors, there are supplimentary colors that lie about 20 degrees away from the base or complementary color.

While these techniques are fine for a start, they fail to address the other two components of color: Saturation and Lightness.

Here's how I like to build a color palette:

First pick my a neutral color. This would be a beige, or light blue, or on the darker end, a navy, or deep brown.  These colors all are not so saturated, and have Lightness values either less that 10% or greater than 90%.

Next pick the main power color. Contrast to the neutral color, this color is the one that attracts attention.  Therefor its saturation is close to 100%, and its lightness is between 40% and 60%

An accent color works as contrast to the main power color, but it still is distinct from the netrual color.  So it too is saturated, but the hue is different 

And finally, I'll pick another neutral color that's the opposite Lightness of the the original neutral color.  So if I started with a light beige, maybe a dark faded forest green.

As a web designer each of these colors easily fits into a purpose

* the first neutral color is the background
* second neutral color is the text color
* And then the two power colors can be used for buttons, links, or other visual elements that you want to call to attention.

Pushing this one step forward, once we have a color palette selected, you might be happy with the relationships between the colors, but not so satisfied with the colors themselves. Since these colors have been selected with HSL in mind, you can spin that color wheel around

One of the lesser-talked about features of CSS3 is the HSLa color value.  

h2. In CSS3


Unfortunately, the HSL color value in CSS3 hasn't been getting much attention.  Part of the problem is that most front-end-developers are content with RGBa.   Familiar Hex codes can easily be translated into RGB, as since Hex codes are just Red Green Blue values expressed in coded manner. HSL requires a full understanding of a different model if you really want to get involved with it.

Of course, Not every browser supports HSLa colors.  I just did a browser check and here were my results:

*show good and bad broswers*

But this doesn't mean that you can completely disregard using HSLa color values in your stylesheets. Here are several practical applications

h2. Practical application


In combination with other CSS3 features: text shadow, box shadow, canvas.

I find that the place where I use HSLa colors the most is in combination with CSS3's other new features: text shadow and box shadow.  I'm already aware that IE isn't going to render any text-shadow, so I might as well use HSL colors with it. The benefit is that switching from white to black is as easy as just changing one value.  Or for that matter, changing from red to green is just as easy, without dipping into Hex codes or remember RGB color values. 

Designing in the browser



