h1. Email

Color Theory for the color blind



Color is such a fundamental part of the visual design process that articulating the development of a color palette can be overlooked. As a visual designer, David will talk about being mindful of the use of color.  As someone who is colorblind, he will discuss how his condition has lead him to approach color theory in a unique way, resulting in applying the new HSLa color value. The talk will be part color theory, part accessibility, part technical demonstration.

David DeSandro will be introducing himself as the new helmsman of the Refresh DC ship. He works as a web designer for nclud, where he explores the frontiers of front-end web development.

Please join us at CDIA in Georgetown for 2010's first Refresh DC meeting.




h1. Talk

Good evening,

I'd like to thank everyone for attending, I realize the message the message got out last for this meeting and this isn't the third thursday so I wanted to say thank you for all the retweets while I sorted out issues with sending the mass email and of course showing up tonight.

My name is David DeSandro and Jackson Wilkinson has handed off administering Refresh DC to me. To kick off the new year and as an introduction for me to you, I'll be presenting tonight.

Before I get into that, I would like to thank our hosts CDIA for providing this awesome space. _To hear more about CDIA, Bill can speak about this facility and the great things that go on here._

@Intro CDIA Person to speak@

To piggyback on to that, I should disclaim that I just graduated from the Graphic and Web Design course earlier just this Sunday. And I must say that it was a great ceremony. And I wasn't alone in that opinion both my family and my girlfriend were really excited to all the creative work being produced here. And if anyone is interested in hearing more about CDIA from a student, feel free to approach me about it later.

So let's begin...

h2. Intro

My name is David DeSandro and I work as a web designer for nclud in Washington DC. Today, I'm going to talk about color. Color is one of the foundational elements along side Layout and Typography that make up the craft of graphic design. It is fundamental. Whether you are designing for a Kindle which can only produce 2 colors, or whether you are composing a CMYK print piece, all designers are in touch with color.

But unlike most designers, my experience using color has been slightly different since I am colorblind.

Now I just want to confront the conundrum of a colorblind designer right up front.  In of itself, I realize that identifying myself as a colorblind designer sounds like an paradox. If you don't mind, here's my break down of a my legitimacy as a designer who is colorblind

Interactive/Front End Development vs. Visuals and Aesthetics
    Layout, Typography, and Color
    
Only 16% Incompetent! - I'll come back to this later



h2. The fas

I've always been a bit surprised by how many people are fascinated with the experience of being colorblind. Colorblindness isn't that rare of a condition.  it's a genetic condition that typically found in males - about 10% of the male US population is colorblind. So its just as common as left handedness. But People don't marvel at someone else being left handed.

Explaining the phenomenae of colorblindness to all my un-color-blind audiences is always an awkward and difficult task.

Some of the fascination is the condition itself.  Colorblind is a mis-nomer.  It reads as "Blind to color", which is then interpreted as "Sees in black and white." Being colorblind typically means that you have trouble distinguishing certain colors from one another. You mix up the colors. The most typical color combinations is Red-green. My trouble color-combos are Red/green/brown and Blues/purples.

h2. This is the fun part

Now I realize how hard this is to comprehend. I think this is where people are interested in hearing what I see. There's a lot more details into when and where I switch up colors, and for the sake of this talk, I don't want to dwell on my condition too much.

But the main problem is this. When I say that "Oh, I mix up colors." That statement is a hard sell. 

This statement is a little broad, but color is obvious.  It is.  As I flick through these various colors, there seems to be little interpretation. You see it, and you identify it. 

The core of the problem of explaining color blindness is that we lack a proper vocabulary for color.  The problem is that of language.

And I think this theory holds up.

Language is controlled in your Left hemisphere.  This is the realm of order, and sorting, and boxes, and accountants and literal and WORDS.

Colors are dealt with the right hemisphere of your brain. This is the side that deals with emotions, and relations, and unicorns, and pure sensations, and feelings and the stuff that can't be put into words.

If I may make an aside - this is what gets me excited right here, because this is what I see design as.  Its the being able to use one side of your brain for the other. Right, its being able to give a purpose for a sensory experience.  Its being able to create an emotion and give it a place. This right here is really what its all about. 

But today we're just talking about color.

So how do we bridge this gap?

h2. Color models

Back in grade school we learned that there were three primary colors - red, yellow, and blue.  And then mixing those we can get orange, green, and purple.  

And then when I got into web design I learned about Additive colors, That Red light, green light and blue light can be combined to make white.  

And then when I learned about print design, I learned that they used Cyan, Magenta, Yellow inks, and you can layer them to get the missing colors.  Plus Black to get the darker areas.

But the real flaw with these models is that they rely on base colors in order to explain secondary colors. For the purposes of explaining color blindness I think there's a better model.

h2. Hello to HSL

That model is the Hue Saturation Lightness model.

Hue is range of all the pure colors.  Think of this as your typical color wheel or a rainbow. ROYGBIV. THE COLORS.

Saturation the range between a saturated pure color, and a desaturated color.  In this case, its the range of a true red to 50% gray.

Lightness is the range of that color in terms of light and dark.

I am simplyfying the theory behind this model, but this is basic jist of it. The reason I rely on it is that I can use simple words, and I feel like most everyone will know what I'm know what I'm talking about.

h2. Back to colorblindness

So back to the square and the circle.  The reason I get these two colors mixed up, is because although they are completely different hues, their lightness and saturation are relatively the same.  So like I said, it's not the literal interpretation of color blind.  It's more like HUE DYSLEXIA.

Of course, there's a lot more to go into color perception and brain processing, but for this talk, since we're all designers, let's get into the practical applications of using the HSL color model.

h2. CSS3 HSL color value

As it just so happens.the HSL color value in CSS3 hasn't been getting much attention.  Part of the problem is that most front-end-developers are content with RGBa.   Familiar Hex codes can easily be translated into RGB, as since Hex codes are just Red Green Blue values expressed in coded manner. HSL requires a full understanding of a different model if you really want to get involved with it.  But now that we went through that, we should be good to go.

like the RGB color value.  The HSL color value requires three numbers.  A Hue, which is expressed as 360 degrees around the color wheel.  Saturation, which is a whole number percent.  And Lightness which is another whole number percent.  Like RGBa, there is also the HSLa color value, which has an additional alpha value for opacity.

The toughest part of understanding how to use HSL model is basically remembering what hues belong to what degree.  The easiest way is to think of the 6 simple hues: red, yellow, green, cyan, blue, magenta.  And each is 60 degrees away from the next, starting with red which is 0.  Looking back on the hue color wheel, you can see that in order to replicate pure blue - that would be #0000FF, the Hue value is 240, the saturation value is 100%, and the lightness value is 100%.

Then once I've settled on a hue, you can fiddle with the saturation and lightness.

Let's jump into some actual examples:

h2. Shadows

I find that the place where I use HSLa colors the most is in combination with CSS3's other new features: text shadow and box shadow.  I'm already aware that IE isn't going to render any text-shadow, so I might as well use HSL colors with it. The benefit is that switching from white to black is as easy as just changing one value.  Or for that matter, changing from red to green is just as easy, without dipping into Hex codes or remember RGB color values. 

h2. Easy color variation through scripts

Since manipulating HSL color values is just plugin in different integers.  It's a lot easier to develop scripts using it. Unlike RGB or Hex codes, you don't have to muddle with mixing colors in order to get the right one you want.  There's just something thats intuitive about it.

    The color grid for Saturation and Lightness was developed using canvas
    The random color screen was developed using jQuery
    Here's a simple PHP script that will out put a bunch of divs slight incrementing the hue 

h2. Selecting your own color palettes

Selecting a base color.  I think of this as a background color.  It should be neutral.

h2. What did we learn today?

* Its not so much color blindness, more like hue dyslexia.
* But working with the HSL model of color, we can better articulate the relationship between colors
* Using HSL color value in your front-end development provides for easier variation in implementing colors programatically

